---
layout: post
author: Chris Woodall
title: "Dune by Frank Herbert"
date: 2017-07-27 15:05
comments: false
categories: reading
image:
---

I finally read [Frank Herbert]'s classic novel _[Dune]_ after avoiding it for a
long time. My father gave me a copy after finishing the [Lord of the
Rings] during middle-school. At the time I found the book to be slow
and overly political, but I came back to it at the perfect time.
The world rife with political unrest and I am more capable of dealing the 
the moral ambiguity of the work. I am also more excited by the ecological and 
social phenomenon of the Freemen and Spice. This book has been discussed many
times before; however, here are a few major take aways: 

1. The parallel stories of Princess Irulan and the Muad'Dib himself, Paul
   Atreides, is very well executed. You actually get a brief and clever glimmer
   into the emperor's court without ever going there, and the author gets a way
   to foreshadow without relying on Paul's murky ability to see into the future
   all of the time. I felt this device tied the story together in an elegant way.
2. The oppression of Arrakis due to the spice is tragic and echoed through many
   Earth civilizations, where a more powerful nation might take control of a
   nation through various methods to mine and drill resources for their own
   benefit. The locals having nothing to do with this other than being there.
   I love the Fremen's subtle plot to undo much of the spice production on
   Arrakis and that their oppression has led to their deadly precision as a
   fighting force. I strongly dislike that their rather pure motivations get
   unhinged by Paul's murkier motivations.
3. I read this around the same time I listened to Dan Carlin's Hardcore History
   Podcast series about the Fall of the Ancient Roman Republic. And though the
   Galactic Empire in the book has already decayed quite a bit I thought that
   the ruthless self-promotion of the Harkonnen's and the conflict between the
   "more royal" and the "richer" families echoed some of the conflicts of the
   Roman Republic towards the end. That said, I think that this theme has played
   out repeatedly in history.
4. The background that AI and computing technology is severly limited due to a
   series of laws passed after an AI uprising is very interesting, especially
   since these tenents are baked into the religion and mutliple major
   organizations in the universe (Mentats, Bene Gesserit and the Space Guild).
   The interesting thing is that by removing AI the humans have figured out how
   to utilize humans with special training, and abilities, to compute extremely
   difficult problems. The interesting thing here is that the main reason these
   "super-human" intelligences are managable is that they have classic human
   flaws, such as addiction to drugs, mortality, and emotional reliance. Over
   and over again these super-humans and undermined by normal humans in higher
   position by a combination of cruelty and loyalty. In a way this is what makes
   Paul such an anomaly. He is trained as a Bene Gesserit and a Mentat, and due
   to exposure to spice has many of the abilities of the Space Guild; however,
   unlike them he is also from the nobility and rutheless. This combination
   makes him almost as dangerous as the AI super-intelligences before, the
   reliance on human computing created the monster they hoped to deny by limiting
   artificial intelligence.

I really enjoyed _Dune_ and would recommend it, just maybe not when
you are 13.

[Frank Herbert]: http://www.dunenovels.com/author/frank-herbert
[Dune]: https://www.amazon.com/Dune-Frank-Herbert-ebook/dp/B00B7NPRY8/ref=asap_bc?ie=UTF8
