---
layout: post
author: Chris Woodall
title: "Error Handling: Implementing an Option&lt;T&gt; Type For Embedded C++"
date: 2016-10-08 16:00
comments: true
categories: blog
#image:
---

I have been learning [Rust][rust] lately, which has been an awesome and
rewarding experience thus far. However, at work, and on many of my embedded side
projects I use `C` and `C++` quite extensively. But error handling ends up being
a major pain point and can make an otherwise rather simple API into a disaster.
This can be especially true if you are committed to avoiding throwing exceptions for various
performance and real-time reliability reasons. This is where Rust's model comes
in as a possibly solution (or at the very least an interesting one): the use of
the `Result<T, E>` types and the `Option<T>` type. For the time being I am going to concentrate on the `Option<T>` type and write about the `Result<T, E>` type in a future post.

The code for this blog post can be found on github as [cpp-option][github]!

<!-- more -->

### So what is this `Option<T>` thing any way?

`Option<T>` represents a value which is either a type `T` (like an `int`, `float`, or `MyFancyClass`) or `Nothing`. It is a pretty simple concept.
This makes and `Option<T>` type very good at representing the class of errors
where either you returned the correct result, *or* you just couldn't finish the
computation for some reason. To some degree this is already represented at C. If
you check for errors by passing or returning a pointer and checking if it is a
null pointer or not, that is a really brittle version of the `Option<T>` type.
It is either some value or `NULL`/`nullptr`. For example, below is an
implementation of divide which performs the computation $$\frac{a}{b}$$ but
returns a nullptr if it fails:

```c++
void divide(int a, int b, int *c) {
  if (b == 0) {
    c == nullptr
  } else {
    *c = a/b;
  }
}

int main(void) {
  int c;
  divide(10, 0, &c);
  if (c != nullptr) {
    printf("I got a %d\n", c);
  } else {
    printf("You divided by 0... the world blew up... Thanks");
  }

  return 0;
}
```
<!-- ** -->

Another option, which is much safer from a memory perspective, is to return an
error or success flag (in this case I will use a `bool` with `true` indicating
success and `false` indicating failure):

```c++
bool divide(int a, int b, int *c) {
  if (b == 0) {
    return false; // oh no...
  } else {
    *c = a/b;
    return true; // success!
  }
}  

int main(void) {
  int c;
  bool ret = divide(10, 0, &c);
  if (ret) {
    printf("I got a %d\n", c);
  } else {
    printf("You divided by 0... the world blew up... Thanks");
  }

  return 0;
}
```
<!-- ** -->

So what is wrong with the above two solutions? _Nothing_. However, they are
syntactically a little burdensome, and you can always just bypass the check and
read the pointer, which may even be pointing at invalid data. Languages like
Rust have an `Option<T>` type ([wiki][wiki-option]), also known as `Maybe` in
Haskell and `Optional` in Swift. This type would allows you to return
"something" or "nothing". So lets see an example of the divide program written
with a yet to be implemented `Option<T>` type.

```c++
Option<int> divide(int a, int b) noexcept {
  if (b == 0) {
    return Nothing();
  } else {
    return Some(a/b);
  }
}

int main(void) {
  auto result = divide(10, 0);
  if (result) { // Check that result is not Nothing
    printf("I got a %d\n", result.unwrap());
  } else {
    printf("You divided by 0... the world blew up... Thanks");
  }

  return 0;
}
```

So what are the benefits over the other divide-by-zero safe `divide()`
implementations?

1. No need to return a separate `success` or `error` type. Could be a possible
   optimization.
2. Natural calling semantics where the value being returned is the value you
   wanted to return.
3. No need to allocate an `int` ahead of time and pass it as a pointer, or
   reference.
4. The user can't interact with the returned value without interacting with
   the `Option<T>` datatype. Discipline is still required because we can't
   enforce checking ahead of time, but it is a reminder.

### So how do we implement this?

Before I continue I want to say that this type is planned to be included in
**C++17** as the `std::optional` type ([link][c++17-option]). There is also
an implementation of this type in Boost as `boost::optional`
([link][boost-option]), with some awesome work by Andrzej Krzemieński. I
highly recommend using one of these two implementations if they are
available right now, but I am constrained from using C++17 or Boost in the
application I want to use this type on. There are a few other implementations of this type in c++ one is by [Cliff
Biffle](http://cliffle.com/) and presented in his Embedded Template
Library ([github][cbiffle-etl]), which has some interesting code and
concepts for C++ on embedded systems. I also found this other
implementation on github which was also inspired by Rust
([github][simonask]). I used all of these great resources and chose to
develop my own implementation to help sharpen my understanding of C++.

First of all, lets set up some requirements.

#### Requirements

1. Should add minimal overhead over type T.
1. Should have minimal `std` library dependencies.
1. Should be stable and reliable, with as few hacks as possible.
1. Never panics or throws...
1. Should work on POD types, would be nice if it worked on more complicated data
   types with non-trivial constructors and destructors.
1. Doesn't need methods which allow for function chaining or lambdas.

#### Implementation

The full, and evolving, implementation can be found
[here](https://github.com/cwoodall/cpp-option) with examples, and unit
tests. However, I will be inlining some of my implementation for discussion.

```c++
struct Nothing {};

template <typename T>
class Option {
 public:
  Option() : isSomething_(false) {}

  Option(Nothing nothing) : isSomething_(false) {}

  Option(T something) : isSomething_(true), something_(something) {}

  // The copy/move functions have been left out see the github link for details.

  /**
   * An explicit conversion to bool, which makes boolean comparisons of the
   * Option type possible
   *
   * @return isSomething_ (true if it is something, false otherwise)
   */
  inline constexpr explicit operator bool(void) const { return isSomething_; }

  /**
   * Get the value stored inside of the Option<T> type
   *
   * @return something_;
   */
  inline T unwrap(void) const { return something_; }

 private:
  bool isSomething_;  ///< @brief stores whether Some(T) or Nothing is stored
  T something_;       ///< @brief temporary storage for the something object
};

template <typename T>
constexpr Option<T> Some(T something) {
  return Option<T>(something);
}
```
<!-- ** -->

The code above implements a basic option type which has the bare minimum
functionality. There are some interesting aspects of this implementation which
I did not know about before. One of them is the ability to override
`explicit operator bool()` to have a [type-safe bool comparison][safebool] which
is a new _C++11_ feature. This allows for the option type to be treated, like a
bool in comparisons. For example:

```c++
Option<float> foo();
if (!foo) {
  puts("Nothing\n"); // This will run
}

if (foo) {
  puts("Nothing\n"); // This wont
}

Option<float> bar(3.14159);
if (bar) {
  printf("%f\n", bar.unwrap()); // This will run
}

if (!bar) {
  printf("This wont print");
}
```

And because it is explicit you can't just cast an Option<int> to some non-boolean type.
In fact the compiler will error and return a somewhat helpful warning.

``` c++
Option<float> foo();

if (foo == 20) {} // wont compile

/*
 * The compiler will return the following message
 *
 * test.cc: In function ‘int main()’:
 * test.cc:7:12: error: ISO C++ forbids comparison between pointer and integer [-fpermissive]
 * if (foo == 20) {} // wont compile
 */
```

Another interesting discovery is that when you return from a C++ function it will
pass off the return values to the constructor of the type you are returning. This makes the following syntax possible.

``` c++
Option<int> returnNothing(void) {
  return Nothing();
}

Option<int> returnSomething(void) {
  return 1;
}
```

This is rather concise, and also a rather efficient way of returning `Option<T>`'s.

So far we have one function for getting the value of a `Option<T>` with something in it: `unwrap()`. However, the function listed above is unsafe, if you call it on an invalid `Option<T>` it will not stop you.

I spent a while trying to figure out how to get the compiler to do what I wanted. Which was to
require that you check the value of `isSomething_` before you can call unwrap().
However,  this did not seem possible. I then tried to spend some time trying to figure out
if I could get `Nothing` options to be different than `Something` options, but I eventually
realized that the compiler would not have enough
information to resolve this reasonably.

I fell back an approach [used by Cliff Biffle][cbiffle-etl], which uses a `Checking` policy system to check and trigger assertions when
the system fails. This is a clever little system and I will probably use a similar approach for some other
systems I am working on. I took a slightly different approach though applying the policy to the unwrap
call directly. The reason for this is so that the caller
of unwrap can determine the policy they want to follow, rather than the creator of the `Option<T>` object. The hope
is that this makes this object a little more effective for use cases where a class
might want to install its own checking policy, or an application might want to say
use a different type of assert/fault logging interface.

``` c++
template<typename T>
class Option {

...

/**
 * Get the value stored inside of the Option<T> type
 *
 * @return something_;
 */
template <typename C = AssertCheckingPolicy>
inline constexpr T unwrap(void) const {
  static_assert(std::is_base_of<CheckingPolicy, C>::value,
                "The checking policy must be derived from CheckingPolicy");
  return C::check(isSomething()), something_;
}

...

};
```
<!-- ** -->

We make the compiler enforce the CheckingPolicy base, and from there give a slightly more informative. Error message than if we just let the compiler fail on `C::check()`. Below are some example policies and the
base class:

``` c++
struct CheckingPolicy {
  constexpr bool check(bool value) { return false; };
};

struct LaxCheckingPolicy : CheckingPolicy {
  static constexpr bool check(bool value) { return true; }
};

struct AssertCheckingPolicy : CheckingPolicy {
  static bool check(bool value) {
    assert(value);
    return true;
  }
};

// And you can even make it throw exceptions! This is used heavily in the unit test.
class OptionInvalidAccessException : std::exception {
  virtual const char* what() const throw() {
    return "Invalid access to Option with Nothing in it";
  }
};

struct ThrowCheckingPolicy : CheckingPolicy {
  static bool check(bool value) {
    if (!value) {
      OptionInvalidAccessException ex;
      throw ex;
    }
    return value;
  }
};

```
<!-- ** -->

And for convenience sometimes you know it might fail and want to fill in a default value. So I provided `unwrap_or()` which allows you to unwrap on
success, or return the or value if there is nothing there.

```c++
/**
 * Get the value stored inside of the Option<T> type or if it is Nothing()
 * then return
 *
 * @return something_;
 */
inline constexpr T unwrap_or(T or_val) const {
  return (isSomething_) ? something_ : or_val;
}
```

All in all I am happy with the class. I have done some work on the move and
copy constructors, but an not completely happy with these, or their effectiveness
on non-trivial data types.

#### Use Case Study: Indexing into an aggregate data type

So let's look at a use case I have been excited about. Returning an Option type
from an aggregate datatype, like a Queue or RingBuffer. Lets first assume we
have a ring buffer implementation `RingBuf<typename T, size_t size>` which
implements a `push` and a `pop` command to put things into the ring buffer and
get them back out. You have to check whether the ring buffer is full or empty,
before you make the accesses, or alternatively return an error type and write
the data through a pointer. For example, to get data out of a ring buffer you
might:

```c++
struct Msg {
  int32_t id;
  size_t len;
  int8_t data[8];
}

RingBuf<Msg, 16> foo;

Msg m;
bool ret = foo.pop(&m);
if (!ret) {
  // Some error happened
} else {
  processMessage(m);
}
```

With `Option<T>` the interface could be rewritten as:

```c++
struct Msg {
  int32_t id;
  size_t len;
  int8_t data[8];
}

RingBuf<Msg, 16> foo;

auto m = foo.pop();
if (!m) {
  // handle error
} else {
  processMessage(m.unwrap());
}
```

That is all well and good, but it only saves you one line of code; but what if
you wanted to express something which you can't otherwise. Let's
say that `Array` implements `Option<T &> operator[](size_t i)` as an array, access. If you have exceptions you can throw an exception to indicate an error,
but if you don't you are left with unsafe code, or clunkier semantics. So what
can we express with option?

```c++
template <typename T, size_t S>
struct Array {
  T buf[S];

  Option<T *> operator[](size_t i) {
    if (i < S) {
      return Some(&buf[i]);
    } else {
      return {};
    }
  }
};

int main() {
  Array<int, 4> foo = {1, 2, 3, 4};

  for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
    auto bar = foo[i];
    if (bar) {
      auto baz = bar.unwrap();
      printf("%d: %d\n", i, *baz);
      // and we can still modify
      (*baz)++;
    } else {
      printf("%d: out of range\n", i);
    }
  }
  return 0;
}
```
<!-- ** -->

What do we gain? On one hand we gain the ability to safely detect errors, and
either delay throws or asserts of our choosing of the user decides to ignore
and just always unwrap. We lose the ability to return a reference and do
operations like. Admittedly if we were just going to return a pointer anyway
we could just check for `nullptr`.

```
foo[i] = 100;
```

Which is somewhat inconvenient for many data types.

### Conclusion

That just about wraps up the basic implementation. I know there are some
inefficiencies and a lot of points for improvement, but the class is rather
usable at the moment. I learned a lot in the process, and plan on using the
feedback I get to improve the class. I also really want to do some overhead
metrics to see how widely I can employ this class.

But what if we want to return a variety of descriptive errors instead of just
`Something` or `Nothing`? Stay tuned for an implementation of `Result<T, E>`!

[safebool]: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/More_C%2B%2B_Idioms/Safe_bool
[github]: https://github.com/cwoodall/cpp-option
[rust]: http://rust-lang.org
[wiki-option]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Option_type
[c++17-option]: http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/experimental/optional
[simonask]: https://github.com/simonask/simonask.github.com/blob/master/maybe.markdown
[cbiffle-etl]: https://github.com/cbiffle/etl/blob/master/data/maybe.h
[boost-option]: http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_61_0/libs/optional/doc/html/index.html
